# Blink

## What is Blink
Blink is the rendering engine used by Chromium. And a rendering engine of a web browser is the part of the software that's used to transform HTML, CSS, and JavaScript along with images and other resources into web pages that you can view and interact with.

## How doe Blink work (Rendering)

At first, Blind needs to retrieve HTML, CSS, Javascript, images, and any other resources that a web page asks for. To do that, Blink needs to manage interactions with network stack in chromium and the underlying operating system. As soon as CSS and HTML is loaded, Blind can begin to transform that code in the form of text into a representation that can work with. This process is called parsing. Javascript also needs to be parsed and then executed. After all of that are done, Blind can then begin the work of lying out and displaying web pages that you can view and interact with. This process is called rendering. At a hight level, rendering has several tasks. A rendering engine displays web page content on the screen, animate visual effects, enable scrolling and route input from users to scripts and underlying subsystems.

## Underlying Graphics Hardware
Blink uses Skia Graphics engine. Rather than try to support multiple different operating systems and devices all on its own and keep up with platform changes, Skia uses a graphics library taht's built for the job such as OpenGL, Vulkan, or DirectX. The graphics library used by Skia depends on the platform it's running on, such as Android on mobile, or windows on desktop.

## JavaScript Engine - V8
Blink uses V8, an open source engine developed by the chromium project to run JavaScript and WebAssembly code in Chrome. V8 makes it possible for a developer to user JavaScript or WebAssembly code to access the capabilities of the underlying browser. For example, to manipulate the document object model, which is the representation that blink builds from HTML code. V8 uses a number of techniques that make it very fast and efficient. In fact, the speed and capability of JavaSCript engines like V8 have transformed the web lots of things that used to be impossible on the web because they were too slow or too memory hungry are now commonplace. V8 needs to process JavaSCript in accordance with the JavaScript standard which is known as ecmascript. In fact, the point a web engines like blink is to interoperably implement web standards that way developers and users can be confident that web pages work well no matter what browser they are using. For example, blink interoperably implements web standards for HTML, CSS, Javascript, and more. If you take a closer look at the HTML standard, and look at the specifications for each HTML element, you will see a section that defines the DOM interface. This is written in a language called Web IDL, web interface definition language. And the web IDL in this section defines how a developer should be able to use JavaScript to interact with an element. This definition is known as an interface. Web IDL is a standardized way of describing functional interfaces that make up most web standards. To implement a feature, engineers put that web IDL code in a file and this automatically get transformed by Blink to provide an interface to developers for that feature. Once the interface is defined with web IDL, Engineers can build the implementations that respond to interface calls. Blink also makes use of lots of fantastic third-party libraries. For example, WebGL is used to render interactive 2D and 3D graphics. Libraries like WebGl are highly optimized and carefully tested. And they give blink access to important features and functionality without needing to reinvent the wheel. So the WebGL IDL is defined. And the Blink engineers connect that web interface with code and libraries under the hood that know how to render things. 

# Chrome vs chromium
Chrome adds some really important features above chromium. For example, Chrome adds proprietary software for decoding audio and video files known as codecs. Chrome and report errors if users give permission and Chrome provides a number of user agent features like password management, shared history, bookmarks, and more using your Google account.