# JWT

## What JWT is used for
JWT is just for authorization not authentication. They are slightly different. With authentication, you are taking in a username and a password, and authenticating to make sure that username and password is correct. It's like logging a user in. Authorization is actually making sure that user that sends request to your server is the same user that actually logged in during the authentication process. It's authorizing that this user has access to this particular system and the way that this is normally done is by using session. For example, you have a session ID that you send down in the cookies of the browser and then every time the client makes your request, they send that session ID up to the server. And the server checks its memory says ok that user has that session ID. It finds that user and then it does the authorization to make sure the user has the access. But JWT instead of actually using these cookies, it uses a JSON web token which is what JWT stands for to do the authorization. 

## Session and cookie
A more traditional user login system that uses session and cookies to store the user. The first thing that happens is the user actually logs in from the client by posting a login service with their email with their email. As soon as that gets to the server, server is going to do the authentication to make sure that user is correct. And if that user is correct with the email password, they are going to store that user inside the session which is stored in the memory of the server. Client will get a unique ID that corresponds with that pert in by cookie. so the browser always has that session ID that it sends up to the server every single time it sends request. When it gets along to the server, server is going to check if the id matches what he has in memory.

## JWT
It works very similar at beginning that we make a post request with email and password. And we send that along to the server just like before. However, instead of storing information on the server inside session memory, server creates a JSON web token (JWT) and encodes and serialize that and signs it with its own secret key, so the server knows if anyone tamper with it then it's invalid. It can be checked based on the fact that it's signed with a secret key. Then it takes that JSON web token and it sends it back to the browser.